                                  ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE(AI)

                                 CHAPTER 4-SYMBOLIC REASONING

Symbolic artificial intelligence is the term for the collection of all methods in artificial 
intelligence research that are based on high-level "symbolic" (human-readable) representations of 
problems, logic and search. Symbolic AI was the dominant paradigm of AI research from the mid-1950s
 until the late 1980s.

John Haugeland gave the name GOFAI ("Good Old-Fashioned Artificial Intelligence") to symbolic AI in
his 1985 book Artificial Intelligence: The Very Idea, which explored the philosophical implications
of artificial intelligence research. In robotics the analogous term is GOFR ("Good Old-Fashioned 
Robotics").

The approach is based on the assumption that many aspects of intelligence can be achieved by the 
manipulation of symbols, an assumption defined as the "physical symbol systems hypothesis" by Allen
Newell and Herbert A. Simon in the middle 1960s.

One popular form of symbolic AI is expert systems, which uses a network of production rules. Product
ion rules connect symbols in a relationship similar to an If-Then statement. The expert system 
processes the rules to make deductions and to determine what additional information it needs, i.e. 
what questions to ask, using human-readable symbols.

Opponents of the symbolic approach include roboticists such as Rodney Brooks, who aims to produce 
autonomous robots without symbolic representation (or with only minimal representation) and 
computational intelligence researchers, who apply techniques such as neural networks and 
optimization to solve problems in machine learning and control engineering.

Symbolic AI was intended to produce general, human-like intelligence in a machine, whereas most 
modern research is directed at specific sub-problems. Research into general intelligence is now 
studied in the sub-field of artificial general intelligence.

Machines were initially designed to formulate outputs based on the inputs that were represented by 
symbols. Symbols are used when the input is definite and falls under certainty. But when there is 
uncertainty involved, for example in formulating predictions, the representation is done using 
"fuzzy logic". This can be seen in artificial neural networks.

In computational mathematics, computer algebra, also called symbolic computation or algebraic 
computation, is a scientific area that refers to the study and development of algorithms and 
software for manipulating mathematical expressions and other mathematical objects. Although 
computer algebra could be considered a subfield of scientific computing, they are generally 
considered as distinct fields because scientific computing is usually based on numerical 
computation with approximate floating point numbers, while symbolic computation emphasizes exact 
computation with expressions containing variables that have no given value and are manipulated as 
symbols.

Software applications that perform symbolic calculations are called computer algebra systems, with 
the term system alluding to the complexity of the main applications that include, at least, a method
 to represent mathematical data in a computer, a user programming language (usually different from 
the language used for the implementation), a dedicated memory manager, a user interface for the 
input/output of mathematical expressions, a large set of routines to perform usual operations, like 
simplification of expressions, differentiation using chain rule, polynomial factorization, 
indefinite integration, etc.

Computer algebra is widely used to experiment in mathematics and to design the formulas that are 
used in numerical programs. It is also used for complete scientific computations, when purely 
numerical methods fail, as in public key cryptography, or for some non-linear problems.